What is Amazon S3?

Amazon S3 is a widely used object storage solution with high levels of security, scalability, and durability, making it a preferred choice for businesses of all sizes and industries. With Amazon S3, you can secure your data both in-transit and at rest thanks to the tight integration with Amazon Key Managed Service (Amazon KMS) which offers encryption services. In addition, your objects are replicated and stored across multiple devices, across multple availability zones within a given region, offering the higher levels of durability. Organizations use it for various purposes, such as data lakes, disaster recovery, log archiving, mobile applications, and big data analytics. Amazon S3 also offers tools for optimizing, organizing, and customizing data access based on commercial, organizational, and regulatory requirements


Amazon S3 comprises of four primary concepts:

Buckets - act as the primary container for objects.
Objects - contain the actual data and metadata.
Keys - unique identifiers for each object within a bucket
Region - denotes the geographic location where the bucket is stored.

Amazon S3 buckets
Amazon S3 offers two types of buckets which act as containers for your data.

General purpose buckets, the original S3 bucket type, are designed for a wide range of use cases and access patterns. Data is stored as as flat files at the root level and given unique global names. Using prefixes and delimiters, data can be categorized for ease of management and better performance.
Directory buckets utilize the S3 Express One Zone storage class (discussed later in this chapter), which particularly ideal for applications that require very high performance and benefit from single-digit millisecond PUT and GET latencies.
Amazon S3 buckets can host as many objects as you want. It offers 11 ‘9s’ (99.999999999) durability and 4 9’s (99.99) of availability. This is achieved because Amazon S3 replicated your objects, across multiple devices, across all availability zones within a region for most storage classes. Access to buckets is managed via bucket policies and access control lists (discussed later in this section).

Amazon S3 objects
Rather than breaking down data into smaller segments and storing it on block storage, Amazon S3 retains data as complete objects. An object is comprised of three elements: data, metadata, and a unique identifier. Metadata contains context-specific information about the object and is stored as a collection of key-value pairs. It includes essential details such as the content type, length, and last modified date. Two types of metadata can be linked to an object in Amazon S3: user-defined and system-defined.

Object storage is ideal for data that needs to be highly durable and where the storage platform is scalable. Unlike file and block storage, which have additional technical limitations and higher costs, object storage services such as Amazon S3 are ideal for hosting digital assets such as videos, images, and documents.

